---
layout: post
title: '🤼‍♀️ #17 Impact of Diagonal Entries of Affinity Propagation (AP) '
date: 2022-05-19 00:00:00 
description: Impact of diagnoal entries of similarity matrix for AP clustering is discussed. 
tags: cluster, data
categories: cluster
---


## 1. Affinity Propagation


Recently, serveral clustering algorithms have been developed. Affinity Propagation is proposed in "Clustering by passing messages between data points" by Brendan J. Frey and Delbert Dueck. Unlike other clustering methods, it does not require specified number of clusters, but controls the number of clusters by the scale of the diagonal entries. AP generates less clusters when the entries are low and many clusters when the entries are high. There are four steps to AP algorithm 



## 2. Algorithm Steps

<h4 style="color:green"> 1. construct similarity matrix by  </h4>

$$
S_{ik} = - ||x_i - x_k||^2
$$

<h4 style="color:green">  2. replace the dignal entries  </h4>

by any value in off-diagnal elements of the similarity matrix. I will notation $q$ to denote the quantile of the values such as median, minimum, and maximum. 

$$
S_{ii} = q, \forall i
$$

<h4 style="color:green"> 3. update responsibility by    </h4>

$$
R_{new}(i,k) \leftarrow S(i,k) - \max_{k'\ne k}\set{A(i,k') + S(i,k')}
$$

<h4 style="color:green"> 4. update availability   </h4>

$$
A_{new}(k,k) \leftarrow \sum_{i' \ne k} \max(0, R(i',k))
$$

$$
A_{new}(i,k) \leftarrow \min \Big( 0, R(k,k) + \sum_{i' \notin \set{i,k}} \max(0, R(i', k)) \Big), i \ne k
$$


It means that the diagonal parts are the sum of the available off diagonal responsibilities.
We can see that diagonal parts are positive while off-diagonal parts are negative. 


<h4 style="color:green"> 5. Update the R, A smoothly. </h4>

$$
R \leftarrow \lambda R + (1-\lambda) R_{new}
$$

$$
A \leftarrow \lambda A + (1-\lambda) A_{new}
$$

Usually, lambda must be large such as $\lambda=0.9$ to preserve the previous R and A.

<h4 style="color:green"> 6. Compute criterion matrix by     </h4>

$$
C(i,k) \leftarrow R(i,k) + A(i,k)
$$


For more details, I recommand to read [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affinity_propagation)




## 2. Results 

Figure 1 shows cluster results with different quantiles. From left to right, we increased the quantile. As can be seen, the nubmer of clusters decreased by increasing the elements in the diagonal part of the similarity matrix. Another observation is the converge speed. In this case, the convergence speed of all quantiles were similar, that is, all the clusterings were converged in 20~25 iterations.

<center>
<div class="row mt-3">
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
            <p>Quantile 0.0 (min)</p>
            {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp17/ani_animation_cluster_0.0.gif" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
            <p>Quantile 0.5 (median)</p>
            {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp17/ani_animation_cluster_0.5.gif" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
            <p>Quantile 0.8 (median)</p>
            {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp17/ani_animation_cluster_0.8.gif" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>
</div>
<p>Figure 1. clusters at each iteartion with quantiles 0, 0.5, and 0.8</p>
</center>


## 3. Visualizing R, A, C Matrices

Figure 2 shows the change of responsibility (R), availability (A), and critrion (C) matrix. As can be seen in the color bars, the magnitude of all values increased. The distribution R matrix did not change but the distribution of A matrix changed. As a result, the criterion matrix was changed. We are not sure what is the meaning of these change. 

<center>
<div class="row mt-3">
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
            {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp17/ani_R_quantile_0.0.gif" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
            {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp17/ani_A_quantile_0.0.gif" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
            {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp17/ani_C_quantile_0.0.gif" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>
</div>
<p>Figure 2. R, A, and C matrices for quantile 0. </p>

</center>

