---
layout: post
title: '✈️ #13 Understanding PascalVOC 2007 segmentation dataset'
date: 2022-05-17 00:00:00 
description: Constructing Pascal VOC 2007 dataset and problems when image is reshaped.
tags: vixion, xai
categories: data
---

## 1. Motivation of this experiment 

Computer vision has various datasets such as ImageNet, MNIST, CelebA. 
We particulary interested in image segmenetation datset where handing each segment may not fit the original image when resized or cropped. Therefore, we present the method to resize and crop the image segmentation data and the problem of cropping with [PascalVOC2007 dataset](http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/index.html). 


## 2. Dataset

#### Image (X)

First, I made a class inherited `torch.utils.dataset.Dataset` to read Pascal VOC dataset. Figure 1 shows an example image of cat class. 
In this case, the figure size is `500 x 375 x 3` which will be resized and cropped resulting in size `224 x 224 x 3` for training deep neural network. 

<center>
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
        <div class="col-sm-6 mt-1 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp13/cat.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>          
</div>
<p> Figure 1. Cat Image</p> 

</center>

#### Annotation (y)

The annotations include

* filename  : image file name stored in the directory.
* size  : size of the image
* segmented : whether it is segmented or not
* objects : a list of objects with annotation such as boundin box and the class


```python
# Figure 1 cat annotations 
'filename': '000019.jpg', 
'size': {'width': 500, 'height': 375, 'depth': 3},
'segmented': '0',
'objects': [
        {'name': 'cat',
        'pose': 'Right',
        'truncated': '0',
        'difficult': '0',
        'bndbox': {'xmin': '231', 'xmax': '483', 'ymin': '88', 'ymax': '256'}},
        {'name': 'cat',
        'pose': 'Right',
        'truncated': '0',
        'difficult': '0',
        'bndbox': {'xmin': '11', 'xmax': '266', 'ymin': '113', 'ymax': '259'}}]}
```



## 3. Segmentation 

There are two types of segmentation dataset, 'class' and 'objects'. `class` segmetation is annotated by index of the class. Here, **we are confused about the meaning of the color.**  We figured out how to interpret each color. 

Consider the code below

```python
class_palette =  np.array(Image.open(segmentation_class_path,  "000019.png")).getpalette()).reshape((-1,3))
object_palette = np.array(Image.open(segmentation_object_path, "000019.png")).getpalette()).reshape((-1,3))
```

This code will return an array of shape [768, 3]. 
Each elements `palette[index, :]` for index among [0,1,2,...,767] represents 

* Segementation class 
  * 0 : Background
  * [1~20] : class indexes
  * 255 : ambiguous
* Segmentation objects
  * 0 : Background
  * [1~] : object indexes
  * 255 : ambiguous

Therefore, you can extract the mask of class or objects locations with the color information. You can plot the overlayed images (see Figure 2).

<center>
<div class="row mt-3">
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp13/class_object.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>    
</div>
<p> Figure 2. Image Segementaion overlays</p> 
</center>


## 4. Resize and Crop the segmentation data

When tranining deep neural network with `torch`, we usually define the following transform fundion to one shot transformation. 

```python
transforms.Compose([
        transforms.Resize(256),
        transforms.CenterCrop(224),
        transforms.ToTensor(),   
        # normalize also
])
```

With the same procedure we can make a segmentation data. Note that `NEAREST` method must be used to resize a segmentation image because there are unique colors in the image and it must be preserved. If other interpolation methods are used, there are unintended colors in the resized segmentation image. Figure 3 shows the overall procedure. 


<center>
<div class="row mt-3">
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp13/method.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>    
</div>
<p> Figure 3. Method to resize and crop the segmentation image.</p> 
</center>



## 5. Problem when cropping. 

Note that resize function preserves most information because we just stretch the image. However, cropping may remove boarder parts and segmented parts of an image is lost. Figure 4 and Figure 5 show  examples of removed segments. The segemented parts removed in two cases. 

1. A whole segmented object is removed (see Figure 4)
2. A part of segement is removed (see Figure 5)

<center>
<div class="row mt-3">
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp13/example.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>    
</div>
<p> Figure 4. Example of problems when cropping. The bottle object is removed after cropping.</p> 
</center>

<center>
<div class="row mt-3">
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/exp13/examples.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable= true %}
        </div>    
</div>
<p> Figure 5. Other examples of cropping problem. (left) the airplane was fully visible, but some parts of the airplane is not visible after cropping. (right)  annotated people class object is removed after cropping. </p> 
</center>

In general, we crop an image by square size `224 x 224`. The problem occurs when the width and height ratio is large. In this case most of image parts will be removed. For example, in the case of ratio `1.5`, approximately 1/3 parts of an image is removed. This problem is due to cropping but resizing. 

By observing such problem, we can guess that **deep neural network is trained to classify an image in square position.** Therefore, the whole class object must be lied in the square region. We are not sure how to handle an image when it is not fully observable.  
